---
layout: ../layouts/PostLayout.astro
title: The July of nonfiction and fire escape porches.
date: 2015-08-25 15:56:01
slug: the-july-of-nonfiction-and-fire-escape-porches
---

I stumbled across a poem by my hero Mary Oliver yesterday, and it's an interesting place to begin as I think of my summer, and though it wasn't in my mind yet, these lines encompass the theme of the past two months: _it is a serious thing /just to be alive /on this fresh morning /in the broken world._ When I teach reading, I tell students to pay attention to the actions of the characters--that they often speak deeply into what's really going on or what they really need. I booked a ticket to leave New York City the day after school got out. That is exactly where I was mentally and what I needed. To go home and breathe. And, of course, to laugh, eat grilled food, and drink wine.   In July I realized that sometimes simply reading to _escape_ is necessary--I disappeared into more than a dozen books and didn't write about a single one. In a more physical sense, after spending ten days on my parents' porch, I felt trapped just thinking about my Brooklyn apartment and its lack of one, so I threw caution {the potential $125 fine} to the wind and turned our fire escape into a porch. This mainly involved taking a beach chair out the kitchen window, staring down squirrels, ignoring the jackhammers in the front of the building, and breathing through my mouth to avoid the sour dishwashing air from the restaurant below. BUT. It was outdoor space and I happily spent almost every morning reading nonfiction on it: *Long Life* by Mary Oliver, _The Folded Clock_ by Heidi Julavits, _The Faraway Nearby_ by Rebecca Solnit, and _Looking at Mindfulness_ by Christophe Andre. The threads I began to see in these books was the value of pausing to create meaning from the world around me. I often pause to create meaning from the books I'm reading, but it was like I needed the fiction to remain an escape and to start reflecting on, interpreting, and _being_ more. So, I unintentionally took a writing sabbatical and found myself joining [my husband](https://instagram.com/dl_warren/) in making art on our coffee table, pursuing meditation, and learning how to play chess (and, let's be real, watching Major Crimes and two seasons of The Americans). I got to the beach and to the woods with a dear friend. I wandered the city with Daniel. Interestingly, on one of my last July mornings on the porch (August brought a week intensive class at Columbia, traveling, and now beginning to think about the school year), I found myself looking at the vine-y plants that migrated from the fence below, up the walls of my building and around the fire escape and saw that in order to climb, they shoot out these tiny arms which wrap themselves around anything nearby. I realized that my time in July was just that: reaching for the truths to sustain my spirit. Here are some of the ones that stayed with me: _"Where have these moments of reflection gone in our modern lives? Certainly not to the radio or television that we turn on as soon as we get home, or the screens that enslave us. Rather than being ways of 'taking our minds off things,' these actions, particularly when they become reflexes, stop our minds being rooted--the exact opposite of what reflection is all about."_ (_Looking at Mindfulness_, page 93) _"We think we tell stories, but stories often tell us, tell us to love or to hate, to see or to be blind. Often, too often, stories saddle us, ride us, whip us onward, tell us what to do, and we do it without questioning. The task of learning to be free requires learning to hear them, to question them, to pause and hear silence, to name them, and then to become the storyteller_." (_The Faraway Nearby,_ page 4) "_\[The earth's\] intonations are our best tonics, if we would take them. For the universe is full of radiant suggestion. For whatever reason, the heart cannot separate the world's appearance and actions from morality and valor, and the power of every idea is intensified, if not actually created, by its expression in substance. Over and over in the butterfly we see the idea of transcendence. In the forest we see not the inert but the aspiring. In water that departs forever and forever returns, we experience eternity_." (_Long Life_, page 25) It always seems to comes back to Mary Oliver: that though the world is broken, it is certainly beautiful. And there is meaning to be made.
